+++
title = "Brazil's Encounters with Judaism, Islam, and Immigration"
date = ""
institution = "Columbia / Oxford"
+++

How did ethnic and religious differences among immigrants shape Brazilian national identity?

The growing ethnic and religious shifts in Brazil’s demographics, especially after the 19th-century, have left a lasting impact on what defines Brazilian identity today. These changes in cultural and religious presence across the nation have challenged and reformed which demographics are recognized as being a part of a larger nationalist narrative, a pattern stemming from colonial subjugation. Through community building around mixed identity, challenging racial classifications, and influencing the culture of the Brazilian elite, especially among Arab immigrants, these differences ultimately led to a hyphenated conception of Brazilian identity—one that was, paradoxically, characterized by its very lack of definition.

Perhaps the most compelling aspect of how ethno-religious difference manifested in Brazil is in the active redefining of Brazil’s social circles and the creation of communities defined by hybrid identities. In the private sphere, Arab (mostly Syrian and Lebanese) immigrants in Brazil often identified themselves by hometowns such as Aleppo or Zahle, but “sought to create a single Syrian-Lebanese identity for the public sphere” (Lesser 55). This collective identity was institutionalized through public expressions of belonging, often stressing common values that linked immigrant communities to Brazilian ideals. One such example of this public negotiation of identity is the Amizade sirio-libanesa monument in São Paulo, which stands as a symbol of the Syrian-Lebanese community’s presence in Brazil. Conceived and constructed in the late 1920s, this monument was designed to honor the centennial of Brazil’s independence, while simultaneously affirming the immigrant community’s deep ties to both their Middle Eastern roots and their adopted Brazilian homeland (Lesser 58). This was orchestrated by Basilio Jafet, a prominent Syrian-Lebanese community leader, who helped raise funds for its completion. The monument’s design itself reflected this dual identity, with reliefs that depicted Syrian contributions to world civilization—such as ancient Phoenician science—alongside a fourth side that symbolized “Syrian penetration in Brazil” through commerce and trade. The opening ceremony for the statue “celebrated ‘the traditional friendship that unites the hardworking Syrian community to the Brazilian people,’” accompanied by parades and “the national anthems of Brazil, Syria, and Lebanon” (Lesser 58). By embracing Brazilian civic rituals, like parades and public celebrations, while maintaining their distinct traditions, these communities demonstrated that Brazilianness could itself be hybrid and plural. While colonial Brazil was often marked by the instilling of Portuguese colonial structures onto existing Indigenous and African communities through farming communities or slave brotherhoods, efforts such as Jafet’s monument reflected the opposite: a striking affirmation of the presence of alternative cultures that by their own volition were redefining Brazilian popular culture. These community efforts extended to philanthropy, as seen in Ceará’s Maronite charity “Sociedade a Mao Branca,” whose aid to local disease victims earned public thanks from the Brazilian Boy Scouts and São Paulo deputies (Lesser 55). This society was founded by Maronite Christians, a branch of Eastern Catholicism with deep roots in Lebanon, who had immigrated to Brazil seeking economic opportunities and religious freedom. As a result, religious identity, too, became a vehicle for cultural permanence and activism that differed from an earlier Brazilian vision of a colonial culture. Arab Muslim immigrants established institutions like the Mesquita Brasil, maintained by the Sociedade Beneficente Muçulmana, founded in 1929, as both a religious and cultural anchor (Osman 7). These spaces were more than places of worship as “para a nossa comunidade é tanto um espaço religioso como um local de reuniões... festas, jantares, comemorações, casamentos” (Osman 9). The fact that an institution as socially sacred and tied to state religion as marriage was taking place in mosques by Arab Muslims suggests somewhat autonomous behavior of these smaller ethno-religious communities in Brazil that was critical to maintaining cultural and family ties. Even leisure practices became tools for social reproduction. One Lebanese descendant recalls that “participar das reuniões da comunidade árabe... é uma forma de manter a comunidade unida... e, principalmente, promover casamentos” (Osman 9). In this way, Arab Brazilian communities actively blended their ethnic and religious identities into Brazilian society, not by dissolving differences, but by negotiating public belonging, helping define Brazil as a nation of hyphenated selves. In the words of Reznik and Carvalho, these institutions were essential as “pois mobilizava relações urbanas já consolidadas e fundamentais à adaptação desses imigrantes em terras brasileiras” (Reznik and Carvalho 19).

This new cultural movement was not only a pattern among Muslims. In fact, as Lesser notes, the first known Arab immigrants to Brazil were actually Jewish, and made a constant effort to blend their religion into Indigenous communities. In fact, “many began relationships with indigenous women and wanted to marry”, so “the leader of the immigrants appointed the most learned member of the group to teach all the fiancees about Judaism” (Lesser 46). Religion and its ties to Arab culture was not only a method of insular cohesion, but also allowed for better incorporation and coping with the changes that came with Brazilian society. Generally, “The idea of a special relationship between Arabs and Brazilians was heartily endorsed by leading members of the Arab-Brazilian community,” creating “a shared culture where everything from the bombachas (leggings) used by gauchos to churrasco (the famous Brazilian meat grill) became of Lebanese origin” (Lesser 44). In addition, earlier immigration of families from Italy also reflected the need for social organization and religious distinctions to form the social cohesion that created the modern Italian influence in Luso-Brazilian culture and demographics (Vendrame 73–84).

Another impact of Brazilian immigration was the direct consequences it had on reshaping Brazilian demographics, especially in terms of racial classification. From the late 19th century, Brazilian immigration policies were designed to attract Europeans, especially Italians, Spaniards, and Portuguese, as part of a broader “whitening” strategy (Ball 3). This approach inherently positioned non-European immigrant groups as outside the scope of the “ideal immigrant” (Ball 3). However, the arrival of Arabs, Asians, and Jews complicated this goal and challenged definitions of Brazilian race and identity, both in state representation and self-identification (Lesser 10). Unlike European immigrants who largely came from countries with established borders by the late 19th century, Arab immigrants originated from territories undergoing political flux, such as Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, and Egypt (Reznik and de Carvalho 14). Sources note that Arabs “não se enquadravam em nenhuma das classificações raciais existentes, pois não eram ‘brancos’, nem ‘pretos’, nem ‘amarelos’”—they did not fit any racial category (Reznik and de Carvalho 14). This lack of a clear racial category meant they were perceived as “deemed both nonwhite and nonblack” (Lesser 7), forcing a confrontation with Brazil's often rigid, yet ambiguous, racial paradigms and creating “favorable conditions in the very gaps of Brazilian immigration policies to enter the country without many restrictions” (Reznik and de Carvalho 15). Their presence, and the diversity of their origins and identities (religious, cultural, and national), immediately posed a challenge to a more traditional Black, white, and Indigenous classification of national identity. Groups like Asians, Arabs, and Jews directly challenged elite notions of national identity (Lesser 79). The idea of “ethnicity” became vital, making it possible to understand belonging to an ethnic group “sem excluir as transformações decorrentes do processo de assimilação e integração do grupo imigrante” (Osman 5). This perspective contributed to the notion of “cultural pluralism” in Brazil, which “não significa atribuir um papel aglutinador ao elemento nacional... mas sim compreender... os inter-relacionamentos entre... grupos estrangeiros e o grupo nacional” (Osman 18). This focus on dynamic interaction and the agency of immigrant groups in maintaining their identity, through cultural practices like language, customs, and religion meant that identity was not merely absorbed but actively negotiated. For example, despite external categorization as “Turk” (“turco”) members of the Arab community self-identified with terms like “‘ibn arab’ and ‘filho de árabe’ (‘son of Arab’) asserting a distinct lineage that coexisted with their evolving Brazilian identity, demonstrating how cultural differences were a basis for self-representation (Osman 6). 

Ultimately, this resistance to homogenization at the expense of native culture forced even the most prejudiced Brazilian policies to concede, either by reclassifying standards of acceptance or even failing to enact discriminatory policy. As Lesser notes, when it came to labor, “eugenics-influenced policy initially favored the entry of German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian workers as braços para a lavoura (agricultural labor). Yet a fear of social and labor activism, and concerns about whether even Central Europeans would assimilate…encouraged a look at non-European groups” (Lesser 4). The growing influence of immigrant groups in Brazil outside of this European narrative ultimately forced labor systems to incorporate Arab workers into their system. Even though an identity of whiteness was linked to desirability in labor employment, Arabs began using this fact to their advantage. In fact, “some immigrant elites argued that their own group was ethnically ‘white’” allowing for their “inclusion in the pantheon of traditionally desirable groups” (Lesser 4). Hierarchies even existed in these subgroups, as Lesser notes, “A popular saying in Brazil is that when a person from the Middle East first arrives, s/he is a turco. After getting a first steady job, s/he becomes a sirio. If a shop or factory is purchased, s/he is transformed into a libanese” (Lesser 41). This encapsulates how Syrian and Lebanese immigrants strategically leveraged their “white-passing” status and economic success to move beyond initial perceptions, while still preserving cultural distinctiveness and challenging the existing racialized labor expectations in Brazil. While policy often prioritized European groups based on governmental labor replacement policies, the experiences of minorities such as Arabs underscored the difficulty and inadequacy of applying existing racial frameworks to diverse origins and self-perceptions in Brazil, a harsh reality for Brazilian policymakers attempting to maintain a Eurocentric vision. 

The influence of factors such as a growing cultural presence and a firm adherence to self-invoked demographics also brewed new ideas among immigrant-inspired intellectuals which directly impacted the acceptance of Arab culture in elite circles. In fact, as Arab immigrants rose in influence and economic standing, they began to actively challenge social understandings of what immigrants were capable of as “Syrian and Lebanese immigrants manipulated elite discourses on ethnicity to create a hyphenated space for themselves” (Lesser 12). Yet, in response, “the state and press sought to redefine one Christian Arab group hoping to immigrate to Brazil as ‘Muslims’ and ‘fanatics’ in order to prohibit their entry”, even though, as mentioned previously, Christian and Muslim Arabs were making their own efforts to integrate into Brazilian culture (Lesser 12). To counter this rejection of Arab identity on the federal level, “immigrants often stood firm, creating dialectical spaces where serious negotiations about national identity took place, helping to explain why “‘dominant’ elites and ‘subordinate’ immigrants came to agree that Brazil was engaged in a mythic search for a ‘national race’” with “images of the Middle East found in discussions of everything from politics to ethnicity” (Lesser 10 and 42). It is this stark impact on elite discussion regarding Brazil’s ethnoreligious identity that reinforces just how hyphenated Brazil’s sense of nationality had become at the advent of new immigration. The Arab migration itself was largely spontaneous, urban-focused, and reliant on existing networks of kinship, friendship, and countrymen, which created “migratory chains” that facilitated everything from travel information to finding work and housing. As a result, Arabs often bypassed official state mechanisms such as the Hospedaria, a federal reception and labor contracting program (Reznik and Carvalho 19). At the same time, the presence of Arabs in intellectual culture was becoming difficult to ignore, and was actively shaping the culture of the elite. As dialectical spaces expanded, particularly in São Paulo, Arabic intellectual circles grew, infusing the city’s literary and cultural scenes with new voices and perspectives. Lesser adds that Arabic-language culture flourished in Brazil, and the São Paulo literary scene became a focal point for debates over hyphenated identities (Lesser 53). The São Paulo literary circle, Al-'Usba al-Andalusiyya (Brazilian New Andalusian League), published a monthly paper that placed Brazil in the center of Arabic literature, even gaining recognition in the Middle East (Ledder 54). This surge in intellectual engagement also caught the attention of major Brazilian writers like Jorge Amado, who became enchanted with the rich tapestry of Arabic culture in Brazil, often weaving it into his literary works and reflecting on its significance for the nation’s identity (Lesser 41). In this way, Arabness was not merely a cultural marker but became a potent intellectual and artistic force, directly influencing figures known to be essential to the fabric of Brazilian identity in the cultural sphere. 

The shifting cultural and religious landscape in Brazil, especially following the influx of Arab immigrants, revealed the inherently paradoxical nature of Brazilian identity. By blending private cultural preservation with public participation, challenging rigid racial classifications, and influencing elite discourses and intellectual circles, immigrants asserted a hybrid identity that resisted erasure while negotiating national belonging. These subpoints collectively demonstrate that Brazilian identity could no longer claim homogeneity but now faced a multifaceted, hyphenated reality. 

{{< works_cited >}}

Ball, Molly C. Navigating Life and Work in Old Republic São Paulo. University Press of Florida, 2021.

Lesser, Jeff. Negotiating National Identity: Immigrants, Minorities, and the Struggle for Ethnicity in Brazil. Duke University Press, 1999.

Lesser, Jeff. Welcoming the Undesirables: Brazil and the Jewish Question. University of California Press, 1995.

Osman, Samira Adel. Imigração árabe no Brasil: histórias de vida de libaneses muçulmanos e cristãos. Xamã, 2011.

Osman, Samira Adel. "Presença muçulmana no Brasil: breve síntese histórica." Hamsa, no. 5, 2019.

Reznik, Luís, and Carolina Da Costa De Carvalho. “Imigração árabe no Rio de Janeiro: um estudo de caso da Hospedaria de Imigrantes da Ilha das Flores (1883-1929).” Revista Territórios e Fronteiras, vol. 13, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2021, pp. 5–23.

Vendrame, Maíra Ines. Power in the Village: Social Networks, Honor and Justice among Immigrant Families from Italy to Brazil. Translated by Miriam Adelman, Routledge, 2020.

{{< /works_cited >}}
