+++
title = "Religious Persecution in the Portuguese Empire"
date = ""
institution = "Oxford"
+++

Was religious persecution an effective form of domination across the Portuguese Empire?

Trial, violence, and control through the framework of religion was rampant under the Portuguese empire, especially with regards to the Christian faith and the influence of religious leaders. A spiritual, economic, and political tension characterized much of early Portuguese accounts of conquered land and the treatment and characterization of Indigenous, African and Lusophone people inhabiting the colonies. Questions arise regarding whether this kind of religious persecution in the hopes of Portuguese domination was truly ‘effective’–that is, whether it aided in the Portuguese gaining control over their colonies (“Domination”). Through the examination of documented histories and legal proceedings in Portuguese colonies, religious persecution emerged as an effective form of domination, especially in the flexibility it gave to legal rulings, its presence as a remedy for political insurrection, and its aid in establishing a racial and gender-based hierarchy.

The legal implications of the presence of religious punishment had a lasting impact on the lives of those across the empire, spanning various cases and components of the Portuguese judicial process. Part of this prevalence of religion as a means to justify judgement can be found in the trial of Crispina Peres of Cacheu, a woman accused of idolatry and polytheism by Catholic officials. Born to a Portuguese father and an African mother, Peres was part of the local trading elite and was married to Captain Jorge Gonçalves Francês​, the captain-general of Cacheu (Green et. al 1). Despite her baptism and Christian upbringing, she was accused of maintaining indigenous practices, including the use of ritual objects and engaging in ceremonies perceived as heretical (Green et. al 3). The evidence of her creating “Chinas”, idols worshipped by some of the communities in Guinea, was enough to lead to her imprisonment and torture (Green et. al 3). Yet, in the process of her trial, there was evidence of her accusers being aware of deviance among priests themselves, suggesting that religious persecution itself could survive despite its legal contradictions. Peres’ main accuser, a man by the name of Pedro Nunes, noted that “the Priest Vicar of this parish of Cacheu António Vaz de Pontes was a sodomite (sic)” and that “women were solicited by Luís Rodrigues during the sacred act of confession” (Green et. al 3). Furthermore, some Catholic priests, while revered by the Portuguese, had themselves participated in Indigenous healing, yet did not suffer from the same scrutiny or persecution as Crispina. Peres confessed that permission “to use the cures” of Gentiles was granted to her by parish priests (Green et. al 110). In addition, she cited that straps made by healers to aid in childbirth were used by the same priest that denounced her (Havik 22). This suggests that, despite the presence of religious and spiritual hypocrisy, the status of Christianity established as a moral guideline was enough for priests to bypass the same laws applied harshly to others. By targeting individuals like Crispina Peres while excusing the transgressions of European priests, the judicial system seemed to have weaponized Christianity to maintain control over the common citizen under the guise of religious orthodoxy. The power of religion in this trial is also evident in the religious shaming used to justify punishment. Rather than questioning the religious authority of these priests, the trial cites a witness who said “Peres does not go to confession or to mass during the entire year, except for Maundy Thursday” which is “to the shame of the people” (Green et. al 9). The use of this fact to possibly weaken the testimony of Peres or perhaps qualify her words emphasizes how Christianity was effectively weaponized to exert legal domination, particularly when it benefitted the legal system and not the accused. To legislate over what was against the Portuguese state and religion was to effectively control society, giving the Portuguese unmatched power in the region.

Other sources also point to the idea that branches of the Portuguese Empire, such as the Inquisition in Pernambuco, served to establish a moral right to “police the religious beliefs and moral behavior of the empire” (Wadsworth 25). While these legal powers “only retained jurisdiction over baptized Christians,” it is clear that their practical use spread far past practicing Christians (Wadsworth 25). In fact, “no clear distinction existed in colonial Brazil between crime and sin,” a sentiment evident not only in the Brazilian Portuguese legal maxims, but also in the treatment of citizens like Peres in the African colonies (Wadsworth 26). Over time, the stretch in the religious grounds for creating legislated crime allowed for prosecution in Pernambuco to encompass much more than what was deemed to be mostly Christian societies. Over time, the crime that the Inquisition had jurisdiction over evolved into “all doubts or ill-will toward the Catholic Church, reason or philosophy, practicing Islam, Judaism, Lutheranism, or Calvinism, sodomy, astrology, witchcraft, false testimony,” and so on (Wadsworth 27). Despite the initial goal in legislating only over exclusively Portuguese colonies with these faith-based rulings, the inevitable spread of the Portuguese colonies into non-Christian communities, led to these legislations being applied to apparent non-believers in Christianity (or those on the fringe of Christian belief), such as Crispina Peres. As a result, the inseparable nature of Christian belief and legal proceedings, paired with its survival despite apparent contradictions in trials and the spread of Portuguese colonies beyond Iberian people, emphasizes the success in using religion as a grounds for legal persecution across the Empire’s global colonies.

Building on the presence of religion in legal settings, its use as a political tool served similar interests in the Portuguese Empire’s effort to remove political enemies in the fear of deviancy, whether it be Indigenous communities, or even Portuguese Christians. A clear example of this can be seen in the Santidade de Jaguaripe, a religious practice among multiracial Brazilians proximate to Portuguese colonial rule. The religious beliefs of this group were deeply tied to being anti-colonial and especially anti-slavery, causing major disruption among Portuguese colonies as slaves and oppressed people rose to influence (Metcalf 2). Although this undermined some Portuguese power, particularly in spiritual matters, it is clear that the Portuguese used religion to justify the destruction of these groups. This was essential as a general mission to ensure political power as well, tying economy, faith, and power all in one. For example, it is noted that, “faced with a labor crisis on the sugar plantations and a conversion crisis the governor of Bahia, the Jesuits, the bishop, and the city council of Salvador joined forces to destroy the sect” (Metcalf 2). Here exists a clear example of how politics and religion converged in the interest of maintaining Portuguese political power in their colonies. Written sources of the Santidade de Jaguaripe, in fact, primarily originate from trials  where “the inquisitor had heard many residents of Salvador…denounce the Portuguese and the mixed-race Mamelucos who tolerated and participated in [the religion] and “tried six of those so accused”’ (Metcalf 8). Furthermore, imposing a singular true religion through Portuguese Christianity justified the destruction of this religious group, especially as it inspired political revolts against the Portuguese and economic disruption. For example, a government-backed sugar planter “destroyed the faith of the [Santidade] by singling out the leaders, who claimed that no sword or chain could hurt them, and executing them in front of their followers”, clearly suggesting an effort to revoke power from deviant religious groups by the Portuguese (Metcalf 10). This is furthered by general efforts of “mockery” by the Portuguese elites and inquisitors, especially as membership in the Santidade began to encroach upon the power of the Portuguese over Brazilian land (Metcalf 10). Jesuits feared that Santidade “threatened salvation” and “colonists and the governor” feared “its appeal to slaves and free workers who fled from the plantations, bringing the mills to a halt” (Metcalf 13). It is clear that this presence of a new, opposing religion was enough to ignite the spiritual and political/economic concerns of the Portuguese, facilitating effective suppression. The idea that baptized slaves and free workers posed a threat to the Portuguese, paired with the incentive to ensure socio-economic stability through faith-based punishment, fueled the destruction of these anti-colonial groups.

Further evidence is shown in the socio-political environment surrounding Gabriel, an Ethiopian Jew, who was persecuted by the Portuguese authorities under the assumption of being a Muslim. Matteo Salvadore writes that the Portuguese tribunal “persecuted local converts who had relapsed into Hinduism or Islam” and that religious restrictions on Christian slavery “turned followers of other religions into ideal victims”, suggesting that religion provided fertile grounds for building the slave economy of the Portuguese. (Salvadore 328 and 335). In addition, accounts also tackle the fear of “crypto-Judaism”, especially with regards to cases such as Gabriel’s, where the Portuguese believed that “by interacting with Jewish communities in the Indian Ocean, New Christians would be exposed to their ancestral practices and eventually relapse into Judaism” which “could hamper religious progress in the Estado” (Salvadore 344). This suggests a clear fear of religious deviancy harming the Portuguese state both politically and spiritually, which, for non-Christians, manifested in “surveillance outputs”, “varying degrees of pomp, publicity, and humiliation”, and even a transfer to secular states to implement the death penalty (Salvadore 345-351). The use of religion as a tool to instill the power of the Portuguese state, in states such as Goa or with the Santidade de Jaguaripe, reflects a strong link between the efforts of the Portuguese to maintain Christianity and the effort to fortify the Portuguese state.

Race and gender also played a key role in the treatment and legislation of religious matters, serving as a means for the Portuguese to exert control over their empire. For example, “as an African, Gabriel was probably among the poorly treated” with Indians and Africans being treated worse in Portuguese trials compared to Europeans, and “Gabriel had no socio-political capital to leverage” due to being African in a Portuguese empire (Salvadore 348-359). In addition, Gabriel’s lower status as a Black Ethiopian, which made him a target for being sold into slavery, could have contributed to his harsher punishment to be a laborer in a monastery under the motivation of “his salvation” (Salvadore 332-351). This treatment of cases such as Gabriel’s seemed to contribute to the crafting of an overall Portuguese-Christian identity, the maintenance of which was critical to maintaining control over Portuguese colonies in Africa. Gender also emerges as an important factor of heightening punishment. The earlier example of Crispina Peres was likely made worse by the common trope of attaching women to witchcraft, especially women such as Peres who were seen to have mixed with African traditions. In Peres’ trial, it is noted that the priest who processed her case “also denounced a number of free women from the town who consulted ‘pagan shrines,’ underlining in this context the agency of women, who were prone to pursuing ‘deviant’ beliefs”, implying a medium for gender-based law to be enacted through the Portuguese crackdown on witchcraft (Havik 201). Furthermore, language among witnesses suggests a racial and gender bias through the erasure of witchcraft, as “all the black women of the settlement and some white women keep shrines in their houses in which they have more faith than in God”, tying in race and gender as a means to separate and ultimately justify the legal persecution of supposed deviant Portuguese citizens (Havik 201). Associating specific religious deviancy with race or gender allowed the Portuguese to target specific populations as a means to establish their power.

While evidence suggests that religious denomination was effective, there are accounts from Portuguese colonies such as Goa where Portuguese control did not fully erase local religious traditions. Historians note that the maintenance of Hindu culture successfully “created a diaspora culture whose…temples just outside the area of Portuguese control” attracted “thousands” and displayed “a ‘palpable, direct defiance of colonial policies under threat of punishment’” (Axelrod et. al 388-389). Historians note a link between Hindu celebrations and Christian traditions that allowed it to survive under strict policies to limit Hindu practices in Goa (Axelrod et. al 389). In fact, similar to the mixing of Catholic and African tradition in Peres’ trial, “Catholics frequently visited the [Hindu] deit[ies] while seeking help for health or other problems”, implying that there was some acceptance in the mixing of Portuguese and Hindu tradition (Axelrod et. al 394). However, this reality of an ideologically mixed Portuguese colony, as shown in the story of Crispina Peres, was not always enough to save its inhabitants from being labeled with identities of witchcraft and paganism, despite the clear involvement of Portuguese Catholics in the same traditions. Even though the religious celebrations of Goan Hindus persisted under Portuguese rule, strict rules still allowed the Portuguese to establish a judicial hierarchy under the name of religion, “destroying the temples, implementing draconian conversion policies, and discriminating against Hindus” which suggests a legal permeance of religious doctrine despite some coexistence (Axelrod et. al 391). The ideological survival of Hindu tradition, as a result, was still subject to continued legal suppression under policy and violence, giving the Portuguese a tool to maintain their dominance.

Weighing the effects of religious persecution and whether it aided the Portuguese in controlling their extended empire introduces questions regarding what it means for a colonial project to be effective. At the same time, it creates a tension between how spiritual persistence of the colonized compares to the institutionalized erasure of the colonizer. Still, religion, power, and the Portuguese empire remain deeply intertwined.

{{< works_cited >}}

"Domination." Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries, Oxford University Press, https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/us/definition/english/domination#:~:text=domination-,noun,especially%20in%20an%20unpleasant%20way. Accessed 4 Feb. 2025..

Green, Toby, Philip J. Havik, and Filipa Ribeiro da Silva. African Voices from the Inquisition: The Trial of Crispina Peres of Cacheu, Guinea-Bissau (1646-1668). First edition, Oxford University Press for the British Academy, 2021.

Havik, P. J. “Hybridising Medicine: Illness, Healing, and the Dynamics of Reciprocal Exchange on the Upper Guinea Coast (West Africa).” Medical History, vol. 60, no. 2, 2016, pp. 181–205.

Metcalf, Alida C. “Millenarian Slaves? The Santidade de Jaguaripe and Slave Resistance in the Americas.” American Historical Review, vol. 104, no. 5, 1999, pp. 1531–1559.

Salvadore, Matteo. “Between the Red Sea Slave Trade and the Goa Inquisition: The Odyssey of Gabriel, a Sixteenth-Century Ethiopian Jew.” Journal of World History, vol. 31, no. 2, 2020, pp. 327–360.

Wadsworth, James E. “In the Name of the Inquisition: The Portuguese Inquisition and Delegated Authority in Colonial Pernambuco, Brazil.” The Americas, vol. 61, no. 1, 2004, pp. 19–54.

{{< /works_cited >}}